when we let brands weigh in on real problems that we face, they do not have an incentive to be honest. They do not have an incentive to be bold and to tell us things that we really need to hear. At the heart of human problems is an inability to own up to our real mistakes, the hard truths that we don't want to see because we don't have the answers, only fear and shame and questions. We sometimes need someone bold because we have insulated ourselves. 

This is how I personally think of "wokism", although it might be helpful to avoid that term entirely XD it's a socially acceptable explanation of a real problem that avoids taking responsibility and doing the hard work of meaningful change. This is so human, and it plays out in our lives on so many levels. As individuals, we all have blindspots that we sometimes catch a glimpse of but it is too painful to take a hard look at. And we also have blindspots that we are completely blind to (unknown unknowns). But we also have an instinct for self-honesty, and these two parts of ourselves can be at odds.

As communities and societies and cultures, it plays out on another level. As an example. I should share this link of a really painful video from the NYT about nimbyism that is everywhere but it is WORST on the left, and yet it seems like a huge factor in our housing crisis, perhaps the most important one. And it definitely is easy to see how conservatives have been unable to face hard truths about themselves and the worst part is that it seems to basically be working for them. 

And as a species we are on a path of destruction not just for ourselves but for our planet. We see it well enough but we are in denial. We need to be bold, to see ourselves as we are, and I really think we will find strength in that. 

But we need boldness, we need honesty, those are our missing ingredients right now it seems. Self-honesty and change can be uncomfortable, painful. Brands and companies have no interest in helping us face hard truths. What Mattel is offering by giving us a superficial exploration of the problem is an opportunity to go through the motions of self-reflection but not tackle the hard part. We pat ourselves on the back and feel wiser and we get no closer to a solution.

But I think a part of us understands this isn't going to work, and maybe that is why it feels so bleak. It's why a lot of people just check out and talking about politics has become uncool. We are starting to believe there are no good answers. 
