# Caged Birds

From kindergarten to 8th grade, my mother was my only teacher and my siblings were my only classmates. I've reflected over the years on the impact of my home school experience on my life, sometimes seeing it positively, sometimes not. 

There was a strong pressure to see it positively at the time. My mother would tell me how blessed home schooled kids are to have a teacher that was so personally invested in their growth. She had a very dim view of public education. She is a devout Christian and believed that an ungodly world view would be a corrupting influence on my life. She believed that learning about evolution would be harmful, in her mind, it was denying the existence of a creator god. In her thinking, if we see ourselves as nothing more than sophisticated apes then we have no motivation to behave morally. If we see ourselves as intentional creations of a loving god then we will feel a stronger sense of worth and purpose. 

She held these beliefs so strongly that she would argue with presenters at the Museum of Natural History if they mentioned Earth being more than 6,000 years old. She would rebut claims about evolution and the history of the earth when they came up on TV. She took us to earth history conferences in Colorado Springs, with speakers like Ken Ham. I remember feeling deeply uncomfortable at the fervor of his words as he talked about the wickedness of the world. I believed everything I had been taught, but I had friends who believed evolution and they didn't seem wicked to me. 

Everyone around me seemed to buzz with the same emotionality of the speaker, particularly my mom. I remember thinking that if I wanted to disagree, which I didn't, it would not go well for me. Experiences like this made me aware of the power of social influence on belief. I didn't have words for it but it was something I felt, like something heavy in my stomach.

She was also afraid of exposure to a secular view of sexuality. She challenged several books when my brother was in public school that were part of the reading curriculum. One of them was *I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings*. She had a collection of passages in the book that she found inappropriate for high school juniors at 16 or 17. She had a list of books that she thought would be better. She challenged the book along with a small group of similar minded parents and they weren't successful.

At the same time, I had nothing remotely resembling sex education. She believed that teaching kids about having sex safely was basically the same as encouraging them to have sex before they are married. 

I experienced sexual trauma at a young age, and I had no way of understanding it. I felt that I had no one I could tell and a great deal of shame and confusion. We were taught that sexual purity was of the utmost importance to God and our future happiness. Sexual sin was a stain that would follow us for the rest of our lives. At the time, I didn't even understand what was happening. There was a boy who was several years older who made it seem like some kind of game. He was also home schooled. I carried that on my own far too long.

--

As I write about this, I wish to focus on telling my experience and to avoid offering judgment. Sometimes it is hard to hold back. As an adult, I have a very different set of beliefs. Everyone in my family is still in my life, and I love them dearly. In most things, we have not let our differences in belief come between us.

Part of my motivation to tell this story is that I wish for us to come to terms with the past. I don't believe it captures the whole truth to tell this story like it was a happy one, and yet that is the only version I have heard. I have not felt free to talk about all the things that happened. I do not want to hurt people I love. I doubt myself at times, like maybe I am making too big of a deal. I have unresolved pain, I believe we all do. But I also believe we can't heal pain that we can't acknowledge even to ourselves.

Our home was a very unhappy one. There was abuse. Most of the time I felt afraid of my father. I was so lonely. Usually my friends didn't want to come over because my father could not control his anger, sometimes even to the point of rage. That can terrorize a child. It didn't bother me so much that they didn't want to visit because I was much happier at their homes. I remember feeling safety and warmth there. Concern. It felt strange and wonderful to feel like I had value. I felt so much dread at my birthday parties that my father would get angry and scare my friends, which often happened when he felt out of control of a situation, which often happened around children. Sometimes spit would fly out of his mouth when he yelled, my friends would ask me why my dad spit at them. I was always in fear of losing these friendships, because sometimes I did.

When we don't treat each other with dignity, that person can start to believe that dignity is something they don't deserve. They can see that others have it and they don't. A child will believe it is their fault. If there is no one in their life who will stand up for their worth, they will struggle to feel it. A child facing the rage of an aggressive, grown man will feel terror and shame. If this is what they face at home, they may forget what safety feels like. That we are safe, that we are worthy of love and dignity, all of this we must be taught. The opposite can be taught too.

My father's rage was unpredictable. I remember being afraid at the sound of his boots on the wooden entryway floor when he would come home from work. I listened to the emotional content of his steps for clues about what kind of mood he was in. If he was in a dark mood, maybe I could get out of the house. Muttering and stomps were a bad sign.

Sometimes abuse is discovered when a teacher notices something off at school. I have read in my mother's journals about a concerned teacher coming to her about one of her kids, believing he may need to talk to a counselor. She told the teacher, "I am his counselor." Not long after that, she started home school. 

My mother also faced this abuse. I saw that she tried her hardest, short of getting much needed help, to make our home more happy. She often did this through a stubborn expression of cheerfulness. Sometimes I was grateful for it and sometimes it felt wrong, even frightening in a way. I knew something was not right about it. And sometimes she did stick up for us, and even was able to convince my father that something needed to change. He might even make promises that would eventually be forgotten. I don't believe this was his intent, but he manipulated her very well. A part of him seemed to want to crush her spirit, and he did.

My father faced the expectation, within his family and his church, to do something that was impossible for him on his own: To be a wise and loving father. He had never known one. He was depressed. He saw us so negatively maybe because he saw everything so negatively, including himself. Depression can be understood as an information processing problem where we perceive most things as worse than they are. I know he often felt alone and misunderstood and his anger was a stress response. He had unhealthy beliefs about mental health and therapy, and few friendships. 

It was strange to me that he would become very different around other people, shy and reserved. He grew up very poor and had almost no emotional support. He met my mother at a very young age and they were sweethearts ever since. They got saved at a Billy Graham revival and dedicated their lives to serving God. Part of that ideology was the belief that a man is the leader of the household, and that a wife should submit to his authority in all things. For these two people in particular, some people will recognize this belief as a recipe for disaster, and it was. At home, he created a world where he didn't have to answer to anyone, and he was a tyrant. It was a lonely world, and he suffered too, a prisoner to his beliefs and emotion. 

He was strangely bothered that we were overweight. My mom writes in her journal about how we were expected to lose a certain number of pounds in a very short time, and then we could go to a pizza party that his work was hosting. I believe he was embarrassed that his kids and wife were overweight. He was overweight too. He would often look at us with disgust at the table if we took too much food. My mom writes with so much joy when we were able to lose weight, and with despair when we would gain it back. Of course, these fluctuations in weight were not about fat loss or gain, it was impossible for us to lose or gain that much fat in that interval of time, even with the starvation diets we were on. As adults, we have all struggled with our weight and feeling good about how we look.

To help us lose weight and for "P.E.", we sometimes had to jog around the neighborhood, and at a time in the morning when other kids were waiting for the bus. They could be cruel, they didn't understand why we weren't going to school too.

I have asked myself whether my dad acted out of cruelty. At times he was vicious enough that I was certain it was true. And yet at times I could see that he was scared too. I believe he sits on a well of emotion that he doesn't have the tools or the self-compassion to understand. His instincts, like many boys and men are taught, is to try and plug that well when anything that seems unmanly comes to the surface. Fear, weakness, worthlessness, shame, rejection, the need for tenderness, these were all banished. So all his emotions come out in the shape of anger. Those he let flow, even when the pressure was so much that he couldn't control it. Rather than try to protect us, to make us feel safe, he seemed to relish our fear and feelings of worthlessness. I think in some part of his mind it felt fair, righteous.

He didn't see himself as abusive because he believed that "abuse" meant physical abuse. He slapped us, sometimes on the back of the head where we couldn't see it coming, maybe for spilling milk on the table. This also didn't count as serious abuse to my mother, and I have heard her speak with gratitude about how he wouldn't cross that line. As out of control as he seemed, he understood where the line was. He did not punch us or break any bones. That was the line where she might actually leave. She didn't understand that she was the one setting the rules that allowed him to treat us like that.

There were also happy moments. When he was happy, we were all happy. He could show such mirth and tenderness, although it was rare. Sometimes, usually on father's day or mother's day, he would even acknowledge the pain he caused, usually in the context of his grievances against us, and we would all cry together as a family. I remember how emotionally heavy those moments were. Sometimes they seemed like moments of hope. 

As an older man, he is kinder and slower to anger. Recently, we have been able to talk and see each other with more compassion. At times, he has supported me when it seemed like no one else in this world would. He seems to want to understand the impact he had. I know how difficult it is to sincerely explore the ways we have hurt others, with honesty and without defensiveness. I see it as a true expression of love. 

Very few people in my life know what my family has faced, what I faced. I have hidden it from others, I feel ashamed to talk about it. It feels like an ugliness, a brokenness that somehow seems like it is my fault. It feels like this cloud of shame has followed us all our lives. I'm not sure whether talking about it will banish it or make it worse. But I am tired of carrying shame that shouldn't belong to me.

It is my hope that if my family reads this, they will find validation and self-compassion. If someone who is considering home school reads this, I hope they will stop and think about what personal motives they may have that are not easy to acknowledge. I don't believe home school is always bad, there are many different reasons to do it. A home school parent must be unusually honest about their own ability and blind spots. And they need to be honest about the unique challenges their kids will face. They must have a reverence for the value of education and a deep appreciation for the challenge of teaching.

They must provide a good learning environment. A good learning environment must provide safety. We should not seek to be safe all the time, but we should at least feel safe some of the time. The brain struggles to learn and consolidate new information under conditions of constant stress and fear. 

I believe all kids should be guaranteed access to a school counselor that *isn't* their parent. At a minimum, they have the right to know about the opportunity and an easy way to access it that is independent of their parents. We recognize the importance of school counselors and it would worry us to hear that kids in school are unable to talk to one. They are just as important, maybe more, for home schoolers. They need to be able to tell someone if something is wrong in their home. Someone like this could have changed my life.

If a home schooler facing abuse reads this, or anyone facing abuse, I wish for you to hear that you deserve safety. You deserve help. Please look for help, please hang on.

--

I wish to pour a thousand gallons of ice cold water on the idea that parents always know better than teachers what is best for their kids. Parents are human, so they are sometimes arrogant and they have blind spots. I believe a child benefits from having many teachers, many examples to learn from, in addition to their parents. The mentoring of my instructors and professors changed my life. I look back at these important people in my life with a heart that overflows with gratitude. They may not have realized how important their kindness and their example was for me.

There were positive aspects to my early education too. I am a very independent learner, and that helped me in college and in my work. There were interesting and rich experiences, like a road trip across the country that my mother fit into her curriculum. She put great care into our curriculum, by her own standards. She chose coursework mostly by Christian publishers. 

She did not handle well the frustrations of teaching. When we would struggle, we would sometimes cry and she would mock us. She believes that children will cry just to get out of doing something they don't want to do. In her mind, it was an intentional attempt to manipulate her, and the right thing is to stay firm and even sometimes ridicule the child. It was simple for her to dismiss our tears and frustration, especially when they made *her* feel like a failure. A part of her seemed to understand we needed help. She would write about it in her journal and ask, *what will this do to our kids?* It was not an environment that was conducive to learning. She was too arrogant about her own ability, and too dismissive of the value that other teachers could bring to the lives of her children.

Experiencing a classroom for the first time in the 9th grade was like diving into the deep end after learning to swim in a kiddie pool. There were significant gaps in my education and I struggled. I had so many issues understanding what was expected of me socially, I had to scramble to develop social skills. I had a lot of difficulty following the rules, and got expelled after the first semester of 9th grade at a private Christian school. Part of my misbehavior was somewhat out of principle, my first suspension came after I passed around a petition in the school to alter the dress code for the mandatory chapel service each week. Although my petition talked about how God accepts us as we are, the true reason is that I felt awkward enough without church clothes. It was signed by a significant number of teachers and students. I remember the moment in Ms. Telfer's classroom that I was called up to see the principal as it was circulating the small private school.

The other part was just plain impulsiveness and orneriness, and it is possible I'd be this way in any case. But I remember wanting to follow the rules, I acted out to cover up something I was more embarrassed about. Other times, I thought everyone would understand my intentions and that would make a difference. Other times, it seemed to be just about self-destruction. Most of my teachers seemed to like me and recognize that I was struggling. I auditioned for the role of Charlie Brown in *You're a Good Man, Charlie Brown*, and I got the part. I lost it because my grades were too low.

My expulsion from the Christian school was my introduction to public education, starting in the middle of the semester. I found it easy to make friendships, I was even popular in a way. But maintaining those friendships was not easy, and every time a new friend would begin to drift away, I would feel there was something wrong with me. I talked about difficult things with some of my teachers and their kindness changed my life. I struggled socially and academically and at home I still faced the same problems. I eventually dropped out, feeling too stupid to make it. 

On my last day of high school, I decided it would be better to walk the 5 miles home rather than go to the next class. On the way, I remember seeing a big yellow grasshopper crawling slowly across the path. In the crisp Autumn air and with the days getting shorter, it did not have the energy to jump away and do grasshopper things. I sat down next to it and thought about its fate and cried.

I got my GED and struggled through a semester at a community college before dropping out. I dropped out of life for quite some time, battling a deep depression. I told everyone that I had headaches. It wasn't exactly a lie, but it was far from the truth. 

Eventually, I found the strength to go back to community college and retake the classes from my failed first semester. There was a kind of academic redemption policy where the grade could be replaced if you retook the course. I graduated with a 4.0 GPA. I transferred to University of Colorado Denver and received the generous Reisher Family Scholarship and Faculty Grant from the Department of Psychology. I graduated summa cum laude. I went on to work as a research assistant for faculty at the school and was later accepted into their PhD program for Clinical Psychology. My proudest moment was teaching Intro Psych to 110+ students, down in front of a what seemed like a stadium full of bright young minds. I still think about what they wrote on their evaluations of me at the end of the semester and it fills my heart.

I taught a few semesters of Intro Psych and Research Methods. My experience as an instructor left me with a much deeper appreciation for the struggles and joys of teaching. Teachers give us something so important, precious to our lives. My mother gave as much of that gift as she could, and she was earnest in her work. But she kept us from receiving that gift from others. She severely undervalued teachers and public education. And she kept us locked in a lonely world of trauma with few escapes. 

I love her very much. I remember thinking as a child that she was the most beautiful mother in the world. I feel the same now. We must learn to see each other and ourselves as we are and still see our beauty and goodness. On the way there, we must not see what we don't yet understand as wickedness.