# Caged Birds

From kindergarten to 8th grade, my mother was my only teacher and my siblings were my only classmates. I've reflected over the years on the impact of this education experience on my life, sometimes seeing it positively, sometimes not. 

There was a strong pressure to see it positively at the time. My mother would tell me how blessed home schooled kids are to have a teacher that was so personally invested in my growth. She had a very dim view of public education. She is a devout Christian and believed that an ungodly world view would be a corrupting influence on my life. She believed that learning about evolution would be harmful, in her mind it was denying the existence of a creator god. If we see ourselves as nothing more than sophisticated apes then we have no motivation to behave morally. If we see ourselves as intentional creations of a loving god then we will feel a stronger sense of worth and purpose. 

She held these beliefs so strongly that she would argue with presenters at the Museum of Natural History if they mentioned the world being more than 6,000 years old. She would rebut claims about evolution and the history of the earth when they came up on TV. She took us to earth history conferences in Colorado Springs, with speakers like Ken Ham. I remember feeling deeply uncomfortable at the fervor of his words as he talked about the wickedness of the world. I believed everything I had been taught, but I had friends who believed evolution and they didn't seem wicked to me. 

Everyone around me seemed to buzz with the same emotionality of the speaker, particularly my mom. I remember thinking that if I wanted to disagree, which I didn't, it would not go well for me. Experiences like this made me aware of the power of social influence on belief. I didn't have words for it but it was something I felt, like something heavy in my stomach.

She was also afraid of exposure to a secular view of sexuality. She challenged several books when my brother was in public school that were part of the reading curriculum. One of them was *I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings*. She had a collection of passages in the book that she found inappropriate for high school juniors at 16 or 17. She had a list of books that she thought would be better. She challenged the book along with a small group of similar minded parents and they weren't successful.

At the same time, I had nothing remotely resembling sex education. She believed that teaching kids about having sex safely was basically the same as encouraging them to have sex before they are married. 

I experienced sexual trauma at a young age, and I had no way of understanding it. I felt that I had no one I could tell and a great deal of shame and confusion. We were taught that sexual purity was of the utmost importance to God and our future happiness. Sexual sin was a stain that would follow us for the rest of our lives. At the time, I didn't even understand what was happening. There was an older boy who made it seem like some kind of game. He was also home schooled. I carried that on my own far too long.

--

As I write about this, I wish to focus on telling my experience and to avoid offering judgment. Sometimes it is hard to hold back. As an adult, I have a very different set of beliefs. Everyone in my family is still in my life, and I love them dearly. In most things, we have not let our differences in belief come between us. At times, they have shown extraordinary love and acceptance. 

Part of my motivation to tell this story is that I wish for us to come to terms with the past. I don't believe it captures the whole truth to tell this story like it was a happy one, and yet that is the only version I have heard. I have not felt free to talk about all the things that happened. I do not want to hurt people I love. I doubt myself at times, like maybe I am making too big of a deal. I have unresolved pain, I believe we all do. But I also believe we can't heal pain that we can't acknowledge even to ourselves.

Our home was a very unhappy one. There was abuse. Most of the time I felt afraid of my father. I was so lonely. Eventually my friends didn't want to come over because my father could not control his anger, sometimes even to the point of rage. That can terrorize a child. It didn't bother me so much that they didn't want to visit because I was much happier at their homes. I remember feeling safety and warmth there. Concern. It felt strange and wonderful to feel like I had value. I felt so much dread at my birthday parties that my father would get angry and scare my friends, which often happened when he felt out of control of a situation, which often happened around children. Sometimes spit would fly out of his mouth when he yelled, my friends would ask me why my dad spit at them. I was always in fear of losing these friendships, because sometimes I did.

When we don't treat each other with dignity, that person can get the message that they aren't worthy of dignity. If there is no one in their life who will stand up for their worth, they will struggle to feel it. A child facing the rage of a grown man will feel unsafe, terrorized. If this is what they face at home, they may forget what safety feels like. That we are safe, that we are worthy of love, both are something we must be taught. The opposite can be taught too.

My father's rage was unpredictable. I remember being afraid at the sound of my father's boots on the wooden entryway floor when he would come home from work. I listened to the emotional content of his steps for clues about what kind of mood he was in. If he seemed bad, maybe I could get out of the house. Muttering and stomps were a bad sign.

Sometimes abuse is discovered when a teacher notices something off at school. I have read in my mother's journals about a concerned teacher coming to her about one of her kids, believing they may need to talk to a counselor. She told the teacher, "I am their counselor." Not long after that, she started home school. 

My mother also faced this abuse. I saw that she tried her hardest, short of getting much needed help, to make our home more happy. She often did this through a stubborn expression of cheerfulness. Sometimes I was grateful for it and sometimes it felt wrong, even frightening in a way. I knew something was not right about it. And sometimes she did stick up for us, and even was able to convince my father that something needed to change. He might even make promises that would eventually be forgotten. I don't believe this was his intent, but he manipulated her very well. He seemed to want to crush her spirit, and he did.

My father faced the expectation, within his family and his church, to do something that was impossible for him on his own: To be a wise and loving father. He had never known one. He was depressed. He saw us so negatively because he saw everything so negatively. Depression can be understood as an information processing problem where we perceive most things as worse than they are. I know he often felt alone and misunderstood and his anger was a stress response. He also had unhealthy beliefs about mental health and therapy. None of this excuses the pain he inflicted on others, but it helps to understand his problem with compassion. 

I have asked myself whether he acted out of cruelty. At times he was vicious enough to think it true. And yet at times I could see that he was scared too. I believe he sits on a well of emotion that he doesn't have the tools to deal with. His instincts, like many boys and men are taught, is to try and plug that well.  Eventually, it comes loose, and then it is too much to control. 

There were also happy moments. When he was happy, we were all happy. He could show mirth and tenderness. Sometimes, usually on father's day or mother's day, he would even acknowledge the pain he caused and we would all cry together as a family. I remember how emotionally heavy those moments were. Sometimes they seemed like moments of hope.

As an older man, he is kinder and slower to anger. Recently, we have been able to talk and see each other with more compassion. At times he has supported me when it seemed like no one else in this world would. He seems to want to understand the impact he had. I know how difficult it is to sincerely explore the ways we have hurt others, with honesty and without defensiveness. I see it as a true expression of love. 

Very few people in my life know what my family has faced, what I faced. I have hidden it from others, I feel ashamed to talk about it. It feels like an ugliness, a brokenness that somehow seems like it is my fault. It feels like this cloud of shame has followed us all our lives. I'm not sure whether talking about it will banish it or make it worse. But I am tired of carrying shame that shouldn't belong to me.

It is my hope that if my family reads this, they will find validation and self-compassion. If someone who is considering home school reads this, they will stop and think about what personal motives they may have that are not easy to acknowledge. I don't believe home school is always bad, there are many different reasons to do it. A home school parent must be unusually honest about their own ability. Teaching is hard.

I wish to pour cold water on the idea that parents always know better than teachers what is best for their kids. Parents are human, so they are sometimes arrogant and they have blind spots. I believe a child benefits from having many teachers, many examples to learn from, in addition to their parents. The mentoring from my teachers after transferring to school changed my life. I look back at these important people in my life with a heart that overflows with gratitude. They may not have realized how important their kindness and their example was for me.

There were positive aspects to my early education too. I am a very independent learner, and that helped me in college and in my work. There were interesting and rich experiences, like a road trip across the country that my mother fit into her curriculum. She put great care into our curriculum, by her own standards. She chose coursework mostly by Christian publishers. 

She did not handle well the frustrations of teaching. When we would struggle we would sometimes cry and she would mock us. She had moments of clarity and would write about it in her journal and ask, *what will this do to our kids?* It was not an environment that was conducive to learning. She was too arrogant about her own ability, and too dismissive of the value that teachers could bring to the lives of her children.

There were significant gaps in my education that caused great struggle in high school. I had so many issues understanding what was expected of me socially, I had to scramble to develop social skills. I had a lot of difficulty following the rules, and got expelled after the first semester of 9th grade at a private Christian school. That was my introduction to public education, starting in the middle of the year. I made quite a few friendships, but it never felt easy. I eventually dropped out, feeling too stupid to make it. I got my GED and struggled through a semester at a community college before dropping out. I dropped out of life for quite some time, battling a deep depression. I told everyone that I had headaches. It wasn't exactly a lie, but it was far from the truth. 

Eventually, I found the strength to go back to community college and retake the classes from my failed first semester. There was a kind of academic redemption policy where the grade could be replaced. I graduated with a 4.0 GPA. I received the generous Reisher Family Scholarship and finished my BA at the University of Colorado Denver with honors. I went on to work as a research assistant for faculty at the school and was later accepted into their PhD program for Clinical Psychology. My proudest moment was teaching an Intro Psych semester to 110+ students, down in front of a what seemed like a stadium full of bright young minds. I still have all of their teacher evaluations.

My experience as a student instructor left me with a much deeper appreciation for the struggles and joys of teaching. Teachers give us something so important, precious to our lives. My mother gave as much of that gift as she could, and she was earnest in her work. But she kept us from receiving that gift from as many people as we needed. She severely undervalued teachers and public education. And she kept us locked in a world of trauma with few escapes. 

I love her very much. I believe I owe many of my strengths to her. I would like to write about that too. It says in the Bible, "honor thy father and mother." I have not believed in the Bible since I was a teenager, but this is something that I always wished to do for its own sake. I do not believe we honor someone by covering for their shame. Perhaps we shouldn't put it on full display, either. And yet, I have put it somewhere that others can find, as unlikely as it seems. I whisper it into the wind because staying silent no longer feels bearable. 