# The Search for Courage

It has been a rollercoaster year. For the last decade I have worked from home and that's a lot of time all by myself. Last Spring, I decided I would live life a little more earnestly and explore the part of the universe outside of my house. 

I grew corn and squash and pulled a lot of weeds from my plot in a community garden. I took singing lessons and joined a group that formed from students in the class. I went dancing and out on dates and met someone special. I gave a driving lesson to a friend, she had the test the next day (she passed!). I got my first pair of cowboy boots. I hiked several fourteeners (not in those boots). I met some longtime friends and went to the Renfaire in Larkspur for the first time. I took a road trip across the country with my aunt, the scenic route. I took up photography and started playing the guitar again.

All this activity was a big change. The years that came before were as quiet as the last year has been loud. I learned a lot about myself. I always thought of myself as someone with the right amount of courage. I have not tried to be fearless, but I have tried to have the right amounts and the right kinds of fear. I did not want to be like some men who make a big show of their toughness. I have tried to be brave without bravado. I think it has been with mixed success, at times I have been told that I seem fearless, and at times like I was hiding from something that shouldn't be very scary.

I have also faced more than anyone in my life understands. I have faced it alone. There are awful moments from my past that I haven't shared with anyone, not even to the person I married. It took me a long time to acknowledge them even to myself.

As the Autumn days get shorter, I turn into a pumpkin earlier and earlier. I struggle to stay awake past 7pm. Work is very strange right now, and not just for me. ChatGPT is changing the way everyone works. It is sometimes spooky how clever it can seem. I don't have the usual fears about AI, I don't think it is going to turn against humanity, it is not in the same category of an AI that might be capable of that. It doesn't understand what it is saying, it chooses each word based on statistics, not an understanding of the problem. It's cleverness is the fruit of human training. It learned to channel the human spirit by absorbing a vast number of words. Then it learned not to channel the worst parts by countless hours of direct human guidance. The result is a funny kind of oracle that is capable of being extremely wrong or extremely brilliant and it is up to you to know the difference. Sometimes, it is capable of moving me to tears. I think it is beautiful, this strange oracle, and it is a triumph of human intelligence. It is something that came from all of us and, on some level, it belongs to all of us. 

I do have my own fears about AI, about how people might decide to use it. If we someday see it as a mistake, it won't be a computer intelligence that hurt us.

---

Before I was a programmer, I worked in mental health. I sat across from people facing their own struggles and I had the honor to witness their courage. I have seen the strength of the human spirit, I have seen it move mountains. And I know that we can't always be strong. 

Jim, my faculty mentor, once told me that he thought I had something like hypomania. Not because I was doing anything wrong, but to understand the ways that I am different and the energy that I have. He told me about his own struggles. Jim thinks about the brain differently than most people in the field. I know this was not his intent, but it is unfortunate that most of the language we have in mental health uses the framework of pathology. 

Certain mental health issues are unique to Western culture. They seem to come from our extreme individualism, our embrace of productivity that is out of balance with our lives, our difficulty seeing value not expressed somehow in dollars. We have an obsession with superficiality, we celebrate perfectionism, and we hold a deep fear of emotional vulnerability. The human spirit sometimes reacts to these conditions in ways that make us uncomfortable, and then we blame it on the person. We try really hard to figure out what diagnosis they have because it helps us believe that we are different and we are definitely not part of the problem. 

One way that I am different is that I am unusually dedicated to my work. If something seems worth doing, I can pour all my energy into it for days or weeks or months or years. I do not need other people to see the value in it, although I am always grateful when they do. I don't think there is anything different about my brain that makes me capable of this dedication. I think that anyone who follows their curiosity will be blessed with the same energy and focus. I protect it and nurture it like an endangered species. But these days I am more aware of the costs of that path.

I have a longtime friend that is a former marine and current rock star. He is also a black belt and self-defense instructor. If anyone is qualified to talk about courage and fear, it is Gunny. He once told me that fear pulls you in. Fear becomes a problem when we fixate on it until it is all that we can see, like falling into a hole. It makes us doubt our strength and wonder if it was ever there to begin with. He wrote a book called Going Badger, and it is about summoning the spirit of a honey badger when your personal safety is on the line.

My hands sometimes shake, they have since I was a teenager. Doctors have told me that I might have essential tremor, something very common but not well understood. I'm not sure I do. They seem to shake when I am doing something that I care strongly about. If I am intentional, I can be as steady as I wish, but it takes all my focus.    

When someone shakes or seems unsteady, we tend to recognize that as fear. It might be some unhealed trauma, but I am holding more than fear. I hold whatever it takes to keep going.

It is strange, my hands shake the most when I am doing certain things that don't seem all that stressful, like pouring or carrying a full glass. I realize that behind the shaking is the fear of making a mistake, spilling. Growing up, mistakes that you would expect a child to make were sometimes met with explosive rage. Sometimes we learn fear and self-doubt because it was in the curriculum. 

I haven't gone out to play the guitar in quite some time. I notice that people look away from me now when I sing. Not everyone, I still get a lot of kindness. But sometimes I record myself and I see what they see. I see someone with a lot of uncertainty, and it doesn't sound right. This is strange to me, because my first-hand experience of those moments was so different. In the moment, I felt much more steady than I looked.

I'm not sure now why I thought I was ready to play music out on the street. Maybe it was a time of unusually strong encouragement in my life. When my group sang together, the sound was beautiful to my ears. On my own, I can't hear it anymore, maybe it wasn't my own voice I was hearing. A few times in my life, it sounded like someone was singing along with me even when I was alone, I had to look around just to be sure. Maybe sometimes that voice is all I hear, even when other people just hear me.

---

I try not to look away from people who are struggling. We look away because the part of us that holds empathy does not want to hold that discomfort or pain. We live in a culture that encourages us to suffocate strong feelings, to hold it under water until it stops moving. Art and music is a healthy way to let it breathe. We understand that, and we allow it and celebrate emotional creative expression by people who have a lot of talent. We should open our hearts more to hear the beauty in an untrained voice that is daring to sing, to imagine itself differently. 

^Our very survival as a species relies on our ability to imagine ourselves differently. It is a unique human strength, and it is a unique challenge for each human heart. Encouraging that spirit is one of my projects.

Empathy can be understood as an emotional simulation that happens automatically in the brain. It is a replay of what someone else seems to be experiencing, except with us in their shoes. This is why we look away, to abort the experiment. Yet in our own lives, we dream about self-expression. Look at all the movies about breaking out of that shell. Those movies tap into a huge undercurrent of experience in our culture. It is discouraging that our impulse isn't to be more supportive. But we have those inner critics, I believe that is what makes us look away. In the simulation we can hear them, and it sounds like they are talking to us. 

Sometimes during practice, we would talk about music and the motivation and struggles that led us here. One woman told us about her older sister, who ridiculed her and emphasized her mistakes. A voice like that can make us lose sight of what is beautiful in us until the flaws are all we can see. That is why encouragement is such a kindness. We can teach others to talk back to those voices that make them unsteady. But first we have to learn how to question the negativity we hold for ourselves. It is difficult to show someone else a kindness that we haven't learned to show ourselves.

I know some people understand this. It is a gift they are willing to give even some stranger they pass on Pearl Street. I am so grateful for you. 

For now, I am back to writing computer code. Coding is a refuge, and all the problems seem to have a solution. Real life needs breakpoints and unit testing. 